# How to contribute

Thank you for your interest in this project.

❗ **NO AI** ❗  
Contributions provided or generated by 'AI' or 'vibe coding' will not be accepted.  
There is no problem with 'assisted coding' where you let some utility generate boiler plate or simple chore snippets (which wouldn't be that different from traditional usage of 'templates'),
provided you know what to make of those snippets and how to refine them.  
But just throwing a prompt to Copilot and then pasting the result into a PR is not going to cut it.  
Please verify, understand and test what you're doing. If it's code you couldn't write the same way yourself, you shouldn't make a contribution out of it.

❗ This project is not yet in a state where direct contribution of code would make sense as the basic structure has not yet stabilized. ❗

If you still want to support the project or contribute to it, there are several other ways how to help out:

## Upstream

This project depends on a lot of upstream software. Every contribution/bugfix to one of them ultimately means an improvement to this project in the long run. The most notable building blocks are:
- [batocera-emulationstation](https://github.com/batocera-linux/batocera-emulationstation)
- [AntiMicroX](https://github.com/AntiMicroX/antimicrox)
- [YAD](https://github.com/v1cont/yad)
- The emulators mentioned in the readme section [Planned emulator support](https://github.com/GB609/batocera-ES-onArch#planned-emulator-support)
- Any other dependency mentioned in [PKGBUILD](https://github.com/GB609/batocera-ES-onArch/blob/main/package/PKGBUILD)

**However:**  
<ins>Please do not create upstream issues for errors/failures you get while testing this project, unless you can reproduce the issue **outside** the context of `batocera-ES-onArch` as well.</ins>  

## Research

For the implementation of `emulatorlauncher`, knowledge about how to configure the emulators is needed. But not all of them are fully documented. 

The project has a milestone named [Emulator Research](https://github.com/GB609/batocera-ES-onArch/milestone/12).  
Feel free to assign yourself to any **open and unassigned** issue contained in this milestone and post/document your answers to the following questions in it:
1. Which command line options exist to configure the emulator (if any), and what are the possible values/effects?
2. Does it have a command line option to specify a path to an alternative config file instead of reading some (hardcoded) default? **<-- This is the preferred modus of operation for `emulatorlauncher`**
3. If the emulator accepts/uses config files, how do they look, what are the possible options and defaults?  
   The best thing to obtain here would be a full set of commented default files. Sadly, some emulators do not provide these in an easily readable format (in the repo resources or documentation), but generate the files on the fly on first startup.  
   Reverse-engineering this takes time. It would be easier to just install and start them once, then zip up the resulting files.  
   This has not been done this so far, but it would help speed up implementing emulator support once the basic framework is established.

Please add config files as **attachments**, do not just paste their content into issue comments.
- If an emulator only has a single file, upload that.
- If it uses a directory structure with several files, please zip up the structure including all files and upload this instead.

**<ins>The no-AI rule applies here as well.</ins>**  
Because it would still be necessary to double-check and verify every single line against the original documentation to make sure it doesn't contain hallucinations.  
In that case there would be neither meaning nor benefit to accepting any input.
